.\" -*- eval: (nroff-mode) -*-
.de TQ
.br
.ns
.TP \\$1
..
.\" Like TP, but if specified indent is more than half
.\" the current line-length - indent, use the default indent.
.de Tp
.ie \\n(.$=0:((0\\$1)*2u>(\\n(.lu-\\n(.iu)) .TP
.el .TP "\\$1"
..
.TH GSMSENDSMS 8 "##DATE##" "gsmsendsms v##VERSION##"
.PP
.SH NAME
gsmsendsms \- SMS message sender utility
.PP
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B gsmsendsms
[ \fB\-b\fP \fIbaudrate\fP ]
[ \fB\-\-baudrate\fP \fIbaudrate\fP ]
[ \fB\-c\fP \fIconcatenatedID\fP ]
[ \fB\-\-concatenate\fP \fIconcatenatedID\fP ]
[ \fB\-C\fP \fIservice centre address\fP ]
[ \fB\-\-sca\fP \fIservice centre address\fP ]
[ \fB\-d\fP \fIdevice\fP ]
[ \fB\-\-device\fP \fIdevice\fP ]
[ \fB\-h\fP ]
[ \fB\-\-help\fP ]
[ \fB\-I\fP \fIinit string\fP ]
[ \fB\-\-init\fP \fIinit string\fP ]
[ \fB\-r\fP ]
[ \fB\-\-requeststat\fP ]
[ \fB\-t\fP ]
[ \fB\-\-test\fP ]
[ \fB\-v\fP ]
[ \fB\-\-version\fP ]
[ \fB\-X\fP ]
[ \fB\-\-xonxoff\fP ]
\fIphonenumber\fP
[ \fItext\fP ]
.PP
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fIgsmsendsms\fP sends SMS short messages using an GSM mobile phone.
.PP
\fIgsmsendsms\fP attaches itself to the \fIdevice\fP given on the command
line (usually an GSM modem) using the specified \fIbaudrate\fP.  If no
\fIdevice\fP is given, the device \fI/dev/mobilephone\fP is used. If
no \fIbaudrate\fP is given, a default baud rate of 38400 is used.
.PP
\fIgsmsendsms\fP accepts a phone number (recipient address) and the
short message text as parameters. The text may have a maximum length
of 160 characters which is the maximum SMS message length. The GSM
default alphabet is used for encoding. ASCII and Latin\-1 characters
that can not be encoded using the GSM default alphabet are converted
to the GSM delta character (GSM code 16).
.PP
Error messages are printed to the standard error output.  If the program
terminates on error the error code 1 is returned.
.PP
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-b\fP \fIbaudrate\fP, \fB\-\-baudrate\fP \fIbaudrate\fP
The baud rate to use.
.TP
\fB\-c\fP \fIconcatenatedID\fP, \fB\-\-concatenate\fP \fIconcatenatedID\fP
If an ID is given, large SMSs are split into several, concatenated
SMSs. All SMSs have the same ID and are numbered consecutively so that 
the receiving phone can assemble them in the correct order. IDs must
be in the range 0..255. Not all receiving phones will support
concatenated SMSs (and display them as separate SMSs),
since all the numbering and ID information is
carried in the user data header element at the beginning of the SMS
user data. This information may show up as garbage in such phones.
.TP
\fB\-C\fP \fIservice centre address\fP, \fB\-\-sca\fP \fIservice centre address\fP
Sets the service centre address to use for all SUBMIT SMSs (may not
work with some phones).
.TP
\fB\-d\fP \fIdevice\fP, \fB\-\-device\fP \fIdevice\fP
The device to which the GSM modem is connected. The default is
\fI/dev/mobilephone\fP.
.TP
\fB\-h\fP, \fB\-\-help\fP
Prints an option summary.
.TP
\fB-I\fP \fIinit string\fP, \fB\-\-init\fP \fIinit string\fP
Initialization string to send to the TA (default: "E0"). Note that the
sequence "ATZ" is sent first.
.TP
\fB\-r\fP, \fB\-\-requeststat\fP
Request status reports for sent SMS.
.TP
\fB\-t\fP, \fB\-\-test\fP
If this option is given the text is converted
to the GSM default alphabet and back to Latin\-1. This option can be
used to find out how ASCII or Latin\-1 texts are converted to the GSM
default alphabet. Characters that can not be converted to the GSM default
alphabet are reported as ASCII code 172 (Latin\-1 boolean "not")
after this double conversion. No SMS messages are sent, a connection
to a mobile phone is not established.
.TP
\fB\-v\fP, \fB\-\-version\fP
Prints the program version.
.TP
\fB\-X\fP, \fB\-\-xonxoff\fP
Uses software handshaking (XON/XOFF) for accessing the device.
.PP
.SH EXAMPLES
The following two invocations of \fIgsmsendsms\fP each send the same
SMS message to the number "1234":
.PP
.nf
gsmsendsms \-d /dev/ttyS2 \-b 19200  1234 "This is a test."
echo "This is a test." | gsmsendsms \-d /dev/ttyS2 \-b 19200  1234
.fi
.PP
.SH FILES
.TP 1.4i
.B /dev/mobilephone
Default mobile phone device.
.PP
.SH AUTHOR
Peter Hofmann <software@pxh.de>
.PP
.SH BUGS
Report bugs to software@pxh.de.  Include a complete, self-contained
example that will allow the bug to be reproduced, and say which
version of \fIgsmsendsms\fP you are using.
.PP
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 1999 Peter Hofmann
.LP
\fIgsmsendsms\fP is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the terms of the GNU Library General Public License as published by the Free
Software Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option) any later
version.
.LP
\fIgsmsendsms\fP is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
Library General Public License for more details.
.LP
You should have received a copy of the GNU Library General Public License along
with \fIgsmsendsms\fP; see the file COPYING.  If not, write to the Free Software
Foundation, 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
.PP
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR gsminfo(7),
.BR gsmpb(1),
.BR gsmctl(1),
.BR gsmsmsd(8),
.BR gsmsmsstore(1).

