#!/bin/sh
##
##  OSSP uuid - Universally Unique Identifier
##  Copyright (c) 2004-2008 Ralf S. Engelschall <rse@engelschall.com>
##  Copyright (c) 2004-2008 The OSSP Project <http://www.ossp.org/>
##
##  This file is part of OSSP uuid, a library for the generation
##  of UUIDs which can found at http://www.ossp.org/pkg/lib/uuid/
##
##  Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for
##  any purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that
##  the above copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all
##  copies.
##
##  THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED
##  WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
##  MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
##  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS AND COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND THEIR
##  CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
##  SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
##  LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF
##  USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND
##  ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
##  OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT
##  OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
##  SUCH DAMAGE.
##
##  uuid-config.pod: library build utility manpage
##

=pod

=head1 NAME

B<uuid-config> - B<OSSP uuid API build utility>

=head1 VERSION

OSSP uuid UUID_VERSION_STR

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<uuid-config>
[B<--help>]
[B<--version>]
[B<--all>]
[B<--prefix>]
[B<--exec-prefix>]
[B<--bindir>]
[B<--libdir>]
[B<--includedir>]
[B<--mandir>]
[B<--datadir>]
[B<--acdir>]
[B<--cflags>]
[B<--ldflags>]
[B<--libs>]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The B<uuid-config> program is a little helper utility for easy configuring and
building applications based on the uuid(3) library.  It can be used to query the
C compiler and linker flags which are required to correctly compile and link
the application against the uuid(3) library.

=head1 OPTIONS

B<uuid-config> accepts the following options:

=over 2

=item B<--help>

Prints the short usage information.

=item B<--version>

Prints the version number and date of the installed uuid(3) library.

=item B<--all>

Forces the output of all flags, that is, including extra flags which are not
B<OSSP uuid> specific.

=item B<--prefix>

Prints the installation prefix of architecture independent files

=item B<--exec-prefix>

Prints the installation prefix of architecture dependent files.

=item B<--bindir>

Prints the installation directory of binaries.

=item B<--libdir>

Prints the installation directory of libraries.

=item B<--includedir>

Prints the installation directory of include headers.

=item B<--mandir>

Prints the installation directory of manual pages.

=item B<--datadir>

Prints the installation directory of shared data.

=item B<--acdir>

Prints the installation directory of B<autoconf> data.

=item B<--cflags>

Prints the C compiler flags which are needed to compile the uuid(3)-based
application. The output is usually added to the C<CFLAGS> uuidiable of the
applications C<Makefile>.

=item B<--ldflags>

Prints the linker flags (C<-L>) which are needed to link the application with
the uuid(3) library. The output is usually added to the C<LDFLAGS> uuidiable of
the applications C<Makefile>.

=item B<--libs>

Prints the library flags (C<-l>) which are needed to link the application with
the C uuid(3) library. The output is usually added to the C<LIBS> uuidiable of the
applications C<Makefile>.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLE

 CC      = cc
 CFLAGS  = -O `uuid-config --cflags`
 LDFLAGS = `uuid-config --ldflags`
 LIBS    = -lm `uuid-config --libs`

 all: foo
 foo: foo.o
     $(CC) $(LDFLAGS) -o foo foo.o $(LIBS)
 foo.o: foo.c
     $(CC) $(CFLAGS) -c foo.c

=head1 SEE ALSO

uuid(3), uuid(1), OSSP::uuid(3).

=cut

